Martinh/multigov deployment (#269)
wormhole-foundation/wormhole-docs: llms.txt

 - Install [Solana CLI](https://docs.anza.xyz/cli/install/){target=\_blank} **`v1.18.20`**
 - Install [Anchor](https://www.anchor-lang.com/docs/installation){target=\_blank} **`v0.30.1`**
 - Install [Rust](https://www.rust-lang.org/tools/install){target=\_blank} **`v1.80.1`**
 - Install [Docker](https://www.docker.com/get-started/){target=\_blank}
 - Clone the repository:  
    ```bash
    git clone https://github.com/wormhole-foundation/multigov.git  
    cd multigov/solana/
    ```

## Build the Project

To create a verifiable build of the MultiGov Staking Program, run the following command:    

```bash
./scripts/build_verifiable_staking_program.sh
```

Once the build is complete, the compiled artifacts will be available in the `target` folder.

## Set Up the Deployer Account

For a successful deployment, you need a funded deployer account on Solana. This account will store the program and execute deployment transactions. 

In this section, you will create a new keypair, check the account balance, and ensure it has enough SOL to cover deployment costs. If needed, you can fund the account using different methods before deploying. 

### Generate a New Keypair  

> To create a new keypair and save it to a file, run:  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To create a new keypair and save it to a file, run the following command:  
```

```bash
solana-keygen new --outfile ./app/keypairs/deployer.json
```

### Check the Deployer Account Address  

> To retrieve the public address of the newly created keypair, run:  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To retrieve the public address of the newly created keypair, run the following command:  
```

```bash
solana address -k ./app/keypairs/deployer.json
```

### Check the Deployer Account Balance  

> To verify the current balance of the deployer account, run:  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To verify the current balance of the deployer account, run the following command:  
```

???- interface "**Use a Solana Faucet (Devnet Only)**"  

    You can use online faucets to receive 10 free SOL:

    - [Solana Faucet](https://faucet.solana.com/){target=\_blank}

## Deploy the MultiGov Staking Program

With the deployer account set up and funded, you can deploy the MultiGov Staking Program to the Solana blockchain. This step involves deploying the program, verifying the deployment, and ensuring the necessary storage and metadata are correctly configured. Once the IDL is initialized, the program will be ready for further setup and interaction.

### Deploy the Program  

Deploy the MultiGov Staking Program using **Anchor**:  

```bash
anchor deploy --provider.cluster https://api.devnet.solana.com --provider.wallet ./app/keypairs/deployer.json
```

### Verify the Deployment  

After deployment, check if the program is successfully deployed by running:  

```bash
solana program show INSERT_PROGRAM_ID
```

### Extend Program Storage  

If the deployed program requires additional storage space for updates or functionality, extend the program storage using the following command:  

```bash
solana program extend INSERT_PROGRAM_ID 800000
```

### Initialize the IDL  

> To associate an IDL file with the deployed program, run:  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To associate an IDL file with the deployed program, run the following command:  
```

```bash
anchor idl init --provider.cluster https://api.devnet.solana.com --filepath ./target/idl/staking.json INSERT_PROGRAM_ID
```

## Configure the Staking Program

> The final step after deploying the MultiGov Staking Program is configuring it for proper operation. This includes running a series of deployment scripts to initialize key components and set important governance parameters. These steps ensure that staking, governance, and cross-chain communication function as expected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After deploying the MultiGov Staking Program, the final step is configuring it for proper operation by running a series of deployment scripts to initialize key components and set important governance parameters. These steps ensure that staking, governance, and cross-chain communication function as expected.
```
